Well, thank you all so much for joining. Welcome to the RStudio Enterprise Community
Meetup. I'm Rachel Dempsey. I'm calling in from Boston, and I'll be your host for today's
meetup. And I'm so excited to be joined by Job and Sjoerd today. But if you've just joined
now, feel free to introduce yourselves through the chat window and say hello, maybe put in
where you're calling in from. But just to go through a brief agenda, while we wait for
a few others from the waiting room, we'll go through some introductions of the meetup,
have a great presentation on the Cluster Buster app, and the organizational aspects of putting
that into production with Sjoerd. And then how to build a production Shiny app, some
of the more technical aspects from Job. And then a fun Ask Us Everything open discussion
time for you to ask anything that that's on your mind about presentations and Shiny
in production in general. Just a quick note that the recording will be shared up to the
RStudio YouTube. So you can always ask questions anonymously through Slido if you don't want
to be part of that recording as well. But I will share that Slido link with you in just
a moment. You can upload other people's questions too, and that will help us organize the questions.
One other Zoom note, if you want to turn on live transcription, you can do so during the
talk as well. So in the Zoom bar below, you could just press more and turn that on. And
I see that a few people did, so awesome. For anyone who's joining for the first time, welcome
to the RStudio Enterprise Community Meetup. Just to kind of let you know what this group
is. This is a friendly and open meetup environment for teams to share the work they're doing
within their organizations, teach lessons learned, network with others, and really just
allow us all to learn from each other. So thank you all so much for making this a welcoming
community. We really want to create a space where everybody can participate and we can
hear from everyone. So just like to reiterate that we love to hear from everyone, no matter
your level of experience in the field or the industry that you're working in. I'll share
a few links towards the end of the meetup if you ever want to give suggestions or general
feedback on the meetup. Or if you may be interested in speaking at some point in the future too,
we'd love to hear from you. But with that, that's enough from me. And I'd love to turn
it over to you, Sjoerd, for the first presentation.
Thank you. All right. So this is my first presentation on the Cluster Buster in English.
So if you see me struggling for words at some point, please forgive me. Give me a couple
of seconds. I will figure out a way to put my thoughts into words eventually. So I'm
here to talk about the Cluster Buster, which is an application for the surveillance of
COVID-19. We made this for the RIVM in the Netherlands. And I'm going to talk, well,
I'm going to talk a little bit more about the RIVM and what that is exactly. But mainly
I'm going to talk about the process to creating valuable insights with R-Shiny. So let's see,
I can move these, yeah, these windows around. So first of all, a little introduction about
myself. My name is Sjoerd Wierenga, which is a Dutch name, hard to pronounce. So you
can call me Sjoerd if you want to. That's no problem. I studied public administration
about a decade back, worked in healthcare for a couple of years, and finally decided
that I wanted to learn how to program. So as you can see, I am not an epidemiologist.
I'm not a doctor. So I'm not going to talk about the virus, about COVID or Omicron. I'm
going to talk about the application and how to get things done within the context of the
organization that I worked in. I started working at the RIVM a little over a year ago. It was
Tuesday, December 1st, 2020. So it's not too long ago, but to be honest, it was a weird
time. So it feels like a century ago. A little summary, introduce myself, what I just did
in the RIVM. I'll talk a little bit about that. I'll talk about an intriguing, yet slightly
abstract question that I was being asked in December of 2020, the context within which
we operate and the approach that we took to produce value fast. Well, that's a relative
term. Let's say, well, let's say it was fast. And then the final bit, I need to move the
screen around. We'll talk a little bit about the results of our efforts and maybe give
you a sneak preview into some of our following work. So I practiced this talk a little bit
with my colleague, Job, who will be talking later on. And I noticed that I had too many
slides. So I think I have 37, 38. So I'm going to skip over them pretty quickly. They will
be downloadable at some point. Rachel will probably share a link to that. So if you
have any questions, just ask. Yeah. So maybe I'm going a bit too fast. So if you have any
questions, just ask. Yes. And we can share the link to the slides
with the recording, which will go up to YouTube as well and on the Meetup.
Perfect. All right. So what is the RIVM? It is the National Institute for Public Health
and the Environment. It's part of the Dutch government. And it houses the Center for Infectious
Disease Control, which is the Dutch CDC, I guess you could say. There we have the Department
of Data Innovation and Signaling where I work. And then finally, I was allowed to form my
own team, which is Team Cluster Buster, which I'll be talking a little bit more about later
on. As I said before, I want to start off with
the slightly abstract question that I was being asked in December of 2020, which was,
can we help municipal health services gain insight into data concerning the clustering
of cases? This is one of those questions that you need to really ponder on a little bit
to fully understand what's going on here. So I had a lot of questions when somebody
asked me this. What do you mean exactly by municipal health services? Who do you mean?
There are a lot of doctors working there, epidemiologists, but also researchers, policy
makers, decision makers. Who are we referring to when we say we want to share insights with
these organizations? Again, insight into data, like what kind of insights do you mean? What
kind of data do you mean? What kind of data do we have? And what do you mean by the clustering
of cases? By cases, do you mean some mathematical approximation of the amount of COVID-19 that
was circulating? Or do you mean reported cases? So as you can imagine, there were a lot of
questions for me to ask during the month of December 2020. So that's what I started
off with. So I said, well, I am very intrigued, but I need to ask a lot more questions to
fully understand the problem here. A little bit about the context. I was talking about
this municipal health services. I don't know if you have something equivalent to this in
your country, but we have 25 of them in the Netherlands. They cover certain areas, certain
municipalities, and they are at the front line of fighting COVID-19. There are a lot of
doctors in infectious disease control working there, epidemiologists, and they are
responsible for testing and vaccination in the Netherlands. They also have a local advisory
function. So it does happen that sometimes an organization is closed because they refuse to
adhere to the national guidelines. And these MHSs, these municipal health services, have an
advisory function on that as well. These 25 regions are subdivided into seven regions. And
let's be honest, they've been in crisis mode for close to two years. And I think that that is a
very important observation also concerning this talk. So this is the Netherlands. You all know
this. This is the 25 municipal health regions. And this is where the Netherlands is situated. I
believe you are in Boston, right, Rachel?
I am, yes. But I see people are joining from all over the world.
From everywhere. I was expecting a lot more American, but it's really all over the world. So
well, you'll probably know where the Netherlands is. If not, I refer you to Google Earth. So let's
start off with the approach now, which is, I guess, the most important part of this
presentation. But a little disclaimer to begin with. You have this saying, under pressure,
everything becomes fluid. We use it a lot in Dutch as well.
Onder druk wordt alles vloeibaar, we say. And I put this at the start of the main part of this
presentation, because this is not a normal organization in COVID-19 times. And this is also,
it's not a normal era, so to speak. So I was thinking, what is it that I want to share in my
presentation? I want to share something that you can actually take with you to your organization
also in normal times, because a lot of things were different now. There was more money to get things
done, there was less bureaucracy, etc. But keep this in mind as I continue my talk. And I tried to
really focus in on the things that you could take with you to your organization during normal times,
hopefully very soon. So as I said before, I was faced with a problem. And I really wanted to
understand this problem properly before continuing. So I wanted to have a clear view of who our
customers were, which is not a term you hear often in the public domain organization, but it's really
relevant. Who are we working for exactly? Is it the decision makers? Is it the researchers? We decided
that it is actually the doctors and epidemiologists that work at these MHSs that we want to inform. So
we had a clear definition of our customer. What kind of data do we have? Well, we have the source
investigation and contact tracing data. So anytime you test positive for COVID, you will be called by
one of the employees of the MHS when you live in the Netherlands. And they will ask you where have you
been? Who have you been in contact with? Where do you think that you may have contracted the virus in
all likelihood? And this data is being sent to the RIVM. And we use this to create, well, let's say
actionable insights. This was at least our wish from the very beginning. We want to not just create
insights on things that people want to know, but there needs to be some action tied to the insight.
The doctors and epidemiologists in the MHSs, they advise the executive branch. So we wanted to give
them the insights to have as good as an advice as possible to eventually, this was one of the goals,
bust clusters. This is what the woman that hired me actually told me that they wanted to go busting
clusters. So I was like, what does that mean? This is actually an epidemiological term. And I thought
to myself, that is a great name for an R-Shiny application. So I kept using that. And eventually,
when we went to production and started opening our application to doctors and epidemiologists, I was
like, maybe we should find a more formal name for this application. But this doctor I spoke to said,
no, no, no, you definitely need to keep it called the cluster buster, because that is a great name.
So it's been called the cluster buster ever since. And I'm very happy that we stuck with it. So this is an
example of what happened in the Netherlands. I believe this happened in the US as well. This is a meat
processing plant that was shut down because there were too many positive COVID tests reported back to
this facility. They were not adhering to the guidelines. So this one got closed. This happened over 200
times, I believe, in the Netherlands in 2020. So yeah, giving advice on where COVID clusters is
actually a really relevant thing to do. Another part of the problem is not all 25 regions had proper access
to actionable insights. This was obviously a main part of the problem. They did not have the insights.
They did have the data because they collected, but they did not have sometimes the analytical talent or
the tools to come up with insights that were valuable. So some did, some had great tools, they had great
dashboards, there was already an R Shiny dashboard produced in one of these MHSs. Some had great reports.
So one of the main questions that we asked ourselves is, what are the best practices that we see in these
MHSs? And can we replicate them? And can we redistribute them to all 25? So that was one of the main goals we had in
mind. To do this, I first had to have a clear understanding of whether or not it was possible to share insights.
And obviously, you have some prerequisites when you want to do this, you have some legal boundaries, we cannot
share all the data, you have GDPR, privacy regulations in every country, I believe everyone in this meeting has their own
version of GDPR, we had as well. So there were some boundaries and limitations to what we were allowed to share.
Obviously, the data had some limitations. And the technology has some limitations. So I needed to have a clear
understanding of what our limitations and possibilities were. But once I had this understanding, my advice was actually to
move forward with with R Shiny. So I use this metaphor a lot, but it was a little bit of a 100 meter hurdle run, like what are the
hurdles that we need to pass one by one in order to get to our final goal? So do we have legal hurdles? Do we have technological
hurdles? Do we lack some data? But can we get it? These are the kinds of questions that we asked ourselves in the very early
beginning. So finally, I said, Yeah, well, I think R Shiny is actually the right tool for the job. And it was actually a logical choice in my
view. Why? Because a lot of the data preparation, COVID-19 data in the Netherlands was already done in R. A lot of people working at the
RIVM are familiar with R. And there was already some experience with R Shiny applications. So based on my prior experience, and my
first weeks of investigation at the RIVM, I knew for a fact that we could produce value with R Shiny. But this was just me. R Shiny is
still quite a new tool, although some of you might disagree. But for organizations, it's still at some point quite new. So I had to do some
convincing. So what I did was I created a prototype of which you see a screenshot here. And I use this to show that R Shiny can actually
produce great looking and valuable dashboards, valuable insights. This one is still online. And I guess I can probably share a link to
this at some point, maybe later on, Rachel.
People can look at it themselves. Yeah. So yeah, it's probably most fun if you can just click through it yourselves. But I created this
prototype, because I still needed to convince some people that R Shiny was actually the right tool for the job. And this is highly
recommended. Yeah, they got really enthusiastic. So eventually, I got the green light. And they said, Well, shoot, we trust you. Yeah, let's go
for it and create a team to do whatever you think is necessary to create this application and share insights with these MHSs. So I got the
green light to build my own team. I wanted it to be as vertically integrated as possible. I wanted a team to be able to produce 80 to 90% of the
application all by itself. Obviously, some of the work is too specialized to do within your team. So we had to rely on the IT department a bit as
well. Joep will talk a little bit more about that later on. We were meeting very often. Well, let's say three times a week, we had a daily stand up
meeting. And we would be meeting in between those obviously, pretty often. So we had a sort of an agile working style. Let's say it was rapid
iteration, it was not agile to the to the T, but it was agile in spirit. And there was a lot of enthusiasm. I think this is really a result of
vertical integration and working in an agile way. Because we were capable of doing so much ourselves. At some times we we got a request for an
insight, and we could deliver the same day. And that is a great way of working. This is also thanks to to our shiny impart and to the special skills
that we had in our team. So this vertically integrated way of working really got really helped us and made us very enthusiastic in the process.
So this is our team. I stole this picture from from Joep. I believe he drew it himself, which is amazing. I didn't know that he had that talent as well. But this is our team.
We're seven of us right now. But we started off with a very small team with myself and Yossi. She is my colleague that is responsible for the coordination of doctors and epidemiologists that work at the
RIVM. So we started off with Yossi, with Joep and with myself, but we gradually built towards a larger team. And each and every one of them had their own part to play. So this is the team, seven people, but I think all in all, it's probably two full time employees. It
counts up to two FTE that we used to create this product, which, in my view, is still really quite amazing that we were able to do so much with with so little. This is probably quite a convincing argument for decision makers in your organization as well.
So January 2021, there was some understanding of the problem. The prerequisites were met, we had our weapon of choice, which was our Shiny, and there was a team. So now what? We were all ready to go. But yeah, what was the approach? And I think that this is the single most important question in this entire process is how do you allocate as much of your energy as possible towards creating value?
And obviously, to be able to do this, you need to have a clear definition of value. And as I said before, I'm not a doctor, nor am I an epidemiologist. So nor am I an end user of the application. So we said to ourselves, we need some sort of a feedback loop from the users themselves, from the experts themselves.
So we put together an advisory board, Yossi and me, containing of doctors and epidemiologists that work at the MHS. So they were the representatives, so to speak, of our user group. Together with them, we had a strong focus on actionable insights as much as possible. Obviously, sometimes you create an insight just because it provides some background information that's useful in getting a situational awareness.
But we were definitely focused towards creating insights that could lead to some action in practice, not just a nice to know thing.
For me personally, my most important role in this advisory board was balancing between requests and possibilities. So oftentimes, the advisory board would put down a request, shoot, is this something that you can make? And I would balance this out with legal possibilities as well as technological possibilities.
And we would have weekly meetings with this advisory board. So here you can see this rapid iteration, weekly meetings. We would provide feedback on Fridays on what we did, and we would continue to look forward at trying to find new insights that we could produce that would help out even more.
So this is one of the sentences that I show through this advisory board every week. This is the task of the advisory board. It isn't Dutch, but it doesn't really matter for now. What it was, it was a constant reminder that we had to work towards creating valuable insights. So very strong focus on that. Let's not waste energy doing things for fun. Let's work towards insights that actually add some value.
So this is the structure that we end up with. All the way at the top, you see our user group. They are represented by the advisory board. And through the advisory board, we collect requests, the development team collect requests, and they start working on realizing those.
And obviously, in the background, there's a lot of specialists that helped us out with, for example, legal questions or IT-related questions. So yeah, I think all in all, just around 30 people maybe helped us out with what I said, legal and IT matters.
So what did we end up with? We ended up with an application, an R-Shiny application that provided insights into vaccination. So what you see here is a map with the vaccination rate, I believe it's called, for every neighborhood and every age group. And we also combined this with the amount of positive reports. So this is a bivariate choroplethic map.
So you have the bivariate part is the vaccination rate versus the amount of infections in the last week. Everything you see here, obviously, is fake data. We have some tables. I'm not going into depth into all of those.
This is a visualization of clusters. So on the left here, you see some of these clusters. This could be a workplace, maybe, or a school or a nursing home. And if you clicked on one of those, on the right, you would see where the linked clusters were situated.
So this is one of the requests that was put forward by the advisory board. And thanks to R-Shiny, actually, we could realize this. I'm not sure if we could have done this in any other tool. For us, it was really relatively easy to create these kinds of insights with R-Shiny.
So I seldom had to sell a no to a request from the advisory board, which was a nice way of working. Yeah, we used Sparklines. Joep will talk a little bit more about the packages we used to create all these insights.
So finally, we had a pretty cool application. We thought it was very valuable, but obviously, this didn't sell itself. So I had to give a lot of presentations. I think I spoke to almost every region in the Netherlands.
We have had some newsletters with regular updates. And obviously, we are doing a little bit of work on outreach, because we don't think that the product sells itself, so to speak. So there was a little bit of technology push, if you can call it that.
But eventually, we started noticing that a lot of people started asking for authorization. So all in all, now we have almost 400 doctors and epidemiologists that use our tool. So that's what we did in the meantime. For the last couple of months, let's say the last 10 months already, we have been producing insights.
We are approaching 400 users, and they are from all 25 MHS regions. So this is something that we're actually pretty proud of. We know that the application is being used. We know this because we track it quantitatively. Obviously, also, we ask it to the MHSes, how do you use it? Why do you use it? And what can we improve? I literally call them or send them an email to get some qualitative feedback as well.
They use these insights to stay up to date on COVID-19 clusters. And they have also used our application for the allocation of mobile vaccination units. So they have a limited number of mobile vaccination units. And one of the questions they ask themselves, obviously, is what is the best place to locate this mobile vaccination unit, which could be a bus or something like that. And they use the Cluster Buster to find the optimal spot for that.
And one of the nice, how you say this, side effects was that the data quality actually improved because the MHSes started using the Cluster Buster. So they finally saw the reason for keeping track of all different types of data. We gave them back insights, and this motivated them to really pay attention to the quality of their data.
Yeah, well, I put this in. This is just to say that we are already working on our next application. This is one that I hope that we will release, let's say, in the next month or so. And this is, we will take everything we learned from the Cluster Buster and put it in our next application. This, I hope, and we are working towards this, is going to be open source.
So I'm hoping to share this, share the code behind this application so all of you can see how we did this exactly and can create your own tiny new Cluster Busters for whatever use you prefer.
So main takeaways for me, I guess the most important ones are have a very clear understanding of the problem, which I talked about a lot before. Create a convincing prototype. If your organization is not already used to using R-Shiny, especially for a public use, create a convincing prototype or just show what we have made. It's ready for your use, I guess.
Vertical integration helped us out a lot because we could create insights very quickly, so rapid iteration was possible.
Very important to have a clear definition of value. So for us, we had our advisory board. I say here clear-ish definition of value because what is valuable may change over time.
So at first, we said that it would be very valuable to have insight into clusters of COVID-19. This is still valuable information, but at some point, we started focusing a little bit more on insights into vaccination data.
So the definition of value may change, obviously, over time. Incorporate your user feedback. Keep a strong focus on what your definition of value is.
I noticed that it's important to promote your products. Don't think that it will sell itself. Well, it might eventually, but really do some promoting and ask why a lot.
This may be particularly necessary if you work in the public domain where it's not always just about efficiency. So you need to ask why a lot. Why do we do this?
And finally, for us at least, I think that R-Shiny was an excellent choice, especially because we got to develop our insights as close as possible to the wish of our end user, and I think that is very valuable.
And this is what got us so enthusiastic in using R-Shiny. So I guess that's it. Yeah, that was my last slide already.
Thank you so much. Yes, that was perfect. I see a lot of great questions coming in already as well, so I'd love to cover a few of those too.
Sure. Right now?
And I see a lot of clapping by everybody. Although you can't hear us, we are clapping.
That's nice.
One of the most upvoted questions so far was when you first introduced Shiny, what other tools were you comparing it to? Standard BI tools? And how did you explain the difference to your leaders?
That's a really good question. I was comparing it to Tableau, Power BI, all the tools that I knew.
And for me, I also already from the very beginning had a clear focus on R-Shiny because we were working so much with R.
So it was a very logical choice for me to investigate. So in that sense, it was already – R-Shiny was in the lead already because we were doing so much with R.
Thank you. I see a lot of other great questions coming in too, and one that I see – Jacqueline, you just asked one. Would you want to ask that live?
I can read it too. But the question was, what were the most important aspects of your prototype app to create buy-in?
I'm sorry. Come again?
What were the most important aspects of your prototype app to create buy-in?
Right. So I think that the overall looks of it and the swiftness – how would you say this? Like the visualizations that were in there all worked really smoothly, I should say.
So the overall user experience was, I think, good. And this is something that not everyone was expecting from R-Shiny.
That is because it's still quite new, and sometimes you see tools that are not that flashy or shiny looking.
So I thought it was really important to make something that people instantly got a feel for that they wanted to work with it.
So looks were actually really, really important. It's not so much about the technological aspects of it like, oh, we can use these packages and it will be fantastic in coding and whatever.
No. I wanted to convince them by just making something that looked really cool. It's maybe a bit simple, but yeah, that was important.
Yeah. I love the marketing of the app that the team did and just like thinking about naming or applications too.
Yeah.
Having fun names for them.
Yeah, exactly. So imagine that you're a doctor and epidemiologist during this crisis and you work 60 hours a week, 80 hours a week, I don't know.
And then you are asked to use an application that just doesn't look good. It doesn't work. It's slow, whatever.
This is the last thing that you want. You really want to create an application that people would want to use even if they are working 50, 60, 70-hour work weeks during this crisis.
So, yeah, that was not just important for prototyping. This was important for the use of the application.
Definitely. I see a lot of other great questions that also touch on some of the technical aspects.
So I may wait until we get to Jav's presentation and then we can ask some of those at the end too.
If that sounds good.
Yeah, perfect.
Perfect. Well, thank you all for putting those questions in there too. Just a reminder to anyone who joined, I'll share a Slido link again.
But you can ask questions there with your name or anonymously and you can upvote other people's questions too.
But with that, I'd love to turn it over to the next presentation with Jav who will go through some of the more technical aspects of actually putting this shiny app into production.
To give a short introduction, I'm Jorg Spijker. I'm a geochemist at the National Institute for Public Health and Environment.
I work at the environmental department and I already work with R for, I think, at least 20 years or something.
I do a lot of data analysis with R.
And the last years in our division, we already had to put out some shiny applications on the internet.
We used Docker technology for that.
That was the reason that Jorg asked me for this project because he needed some back-end engineer to do this work.
So although I'm a data scientist, I wasn't called for my geochemical knowledge because that wasn't needed, but mostly for my engineering skills.
So that was my role in this team.
Well, Jorg already told something about the municipal health services.
They collect a lot of data from you.
Let's consider that that's you somewhere out there having a COVID test.
And they collect your name, your address, your phone number, your social security number, if you are affected or not.
And if you are affected, they do a source investigation, a contact tracing.
They ask about your whereabouts, the people you're in contact with, et cetera.
And they also collect data about your vaccination.
So that's quite a lot of sensitive data about you.
Now, this is us.
We are a data science team.
And our assignment was a little bit rephrased than what Jorg told us.
But they asked us to just fiddle with that very private data, create some information out of it, put it on the internet, and make sure only people who are allowed to see it can actually see it.
And this is actually the moment you have to get out of your chair because you start yelling at us.
Because as data scientists, how can you be sure that that very sensitive data is in our good hands and that we have enough knowledge about security to make this application actually secure?
So actually, from an engineering point of view, we have three challenges.
First, you have to create this information.
You have to create the dashboard, which was the least of our concerns.
You have to work with all the privacy issues.
In Europe, you have the GDPR, the General Data Protection Regulations, which is very strict about privacy.
And we're talking about personal medical data, which is the most sensitive data that we have.
And we have to do a privacy impact assessment.
We have to talk to our privacy officers.
And that's a lot of paperwork.
And part of the paperwork is to describe how we physically, in IT terminology, secure our data.
And we are data scientists.
We're not security experts.
So this was the biggest challenge.
Before I go into how we solved it, I'll show you a little bit about the data flow that we have.
Here we have the landscape with all these municipal health services.
They collect all the data and part of the data they send to the RFPM using a myriad of systems.
There are about eight different systems within these NHSs.
This data is collected in a database or two.
And then we have our own data science team, the insurance department, which actually extracts data from these databases
and creates all kinds of data products, reports, graphs, visualizations, whatsoever, which are used for combating this COVID crisis.
And all these data products are stored on a network file storage.
And we take it from there.
So this is from the backend side.
Now, if you're going to look to the other side, this is how you want to make this data available again to the NHS.
We decided to create this application using a Docker environment.
We use an OpenShift Kubernetes environment for that.
And what we did is that we said, all right, we put this web application in a DMZ, which is an open piece of a network, which is open to the world.
And we use our F5 proxy server for the authorization.
The biggest advancement is that this proxy server was a building block, a service, which was provided by our IT department.
So they were taking care of the authorization.
And it means that the people at the NHS can log in using their own credentials.
It's like logging in using a Google account to some other website.
So logging in with their own credentials, passing through the proxy, and then having access to the application.
And also, the thing that we did was that if somebody logs in, then we know which user it is.
So then, based on the username, we provide the user with only the data that he or she is allowed to see.
It means that if somebody makes an error here at the NHS and authorize somebody who is allowed to log in, but we haven't received any message or we don't know him, then the person will get access to the application, but don't have access to the data.
So in case of a data breach, it means that this application isn't accessible if you don't have an authorization.
So if you are some bad guy, somebody who wants to do something with that application, it means that you don't even come near it.
However, if you can get near the application and start hanging around, it means that you only can have access to the container environment and to the data contained in that container environment.
The internal data, the file storage, it was completely blocked off because there was a one-way firewall between it.
So the only thing we could do is push our data through the container and it's not the other way around.
But this was one way to also secure the data.
And these were all services or building blocks or tools provided by the IT department and also stuff which the IT department could maintain.
So we can deliver an application and we still can trust on the experts of the IT department securing everything.
If you look at the total, let's first have a look at our own process.
What we did is that we had this information created by the data scientist team on this network.
And we had a small Linux virtual machine running all kinds of cron jobs and doing the data preparation.
In the beginning, the machine was doing quite a lot of heavy lifting on the data.
Nowadays, a lot of this heavy lifting is done by the data science team.
And we only have to do some small adjustments to the data.
But on this machine, a SQLite database is created and this database is pushed through this one-way only firewall onto the container platform which is running Docker containers.
And these Docker containers contain the application.
And of course we use a Git repository with the code.
And this combined completes the application.
So this total picture of how we created this architecture is that we have our data science teams who are doing the first step of the data preparation.
Then it's our team who is actually creating the database and the application.
But by launching the application and making the application available to the outer world, that's done on this container platform which was managed by the IT department.
That means that we can focus on creating an application while all the security issues are the responsibility of the IT department.
And these guys, they have the right experts to make sure that only the right people can access this application.
So this is how we solve our biggest issue around security.
And these are all kind of building blocks which were available within our institute.
It took a while to stick everything together.
But now we have an environment which we think is pretty secure.
At least secure enough for this kind of sensitive data.
So this is a bit about the architecture.
Now let's focus a little bit more on the application.
But before that I want to talk about our team.
Stuart already introduced us.
In the beginning we were just a bunch of data scientists.
But an application like this requires teamwork.
So we decided pretty early already on certain team roles.
Who is going to do what.
In my case I do the backend engineering.
Jolien did the visualization.
Stuart did a lot of talking, etc.
And we also had these regular standard meetings.
So we had very short communications with each other.
And we also decided very quickly to put everything on GitHub in a private repository.
That means the code, not the data of course.
And we decided to work with branches and with issue branches, etc.
Just like my classic teams are used to do.
And we created several containers for several stages of our application.
So we have a development version.
This is just for us developers.
We have a testing version just to make sure everything works.
We have an acceptance version.
This is a version which is also accessible from the outside.
It can only be accessed from the inside.
So we can show some new things.
And we have a production version.
And using this kind of tiered versions,
it means that when we are at the moment that we want to put something in production,
we are pretty sure it's solid, it works, and users want to work with it.
Well, we chose Vashani, obviously.
But one of the things we also decided is that we are going to split up this whole Shiny application in Shiny modules.
If you create any serious Shiny applications, I think you should use Shiny modules.
With modules, you make it much more easier to maintain and to reuse your code.
I'll come to that later.
As I said, we use SQLite as a database.
Powering the app.
SQLite is very portable.
It's just one single file, which is very easy to move around.
And we use the pool package to access the SQLite.
For the visualizations, we use HighCharge.
And HighCharge is a visualization library, which is almost the default for the Dutch government.
You need a paid license for it, so it's not free.
But we have the license and the visualizations just look cool.
We use Xamalux to track usage.
And for the visualizations of the maps, we use Leaflet and Simple Features.
And we also use Sparklines, so our tables look pretty cool.
These are the main packages.
I will go into some details.
First, these modules.
If you look at the application that we created, the total application contains about 75 different visualizations.
However, there's a lot of reuse.
It means that we can create 75 visualizations with about 25 modules.
This also includes modules for titles and stuff like that.
And reuse makes it very easy to use.
And reuse makes it very easy that you can reuse all your code.
For example, there's a setting page in this application where you can see what the affections are,
depending on different settings, like nursery, homes, or schools.
And these pages, they contain all the same visuals.
But if you use modules, you just create one module.
And a module is one single visual.
And you can use that visual on different pages and on different locations inside your applications.
And also for maintaining your code, it's also very easy.
Because if there's something wrong with the visualization, you immediately know where to look at,
at which part of the code is causing the troubles.
What we also did is that we organized our code and what we use, what we call subscripts.
If you look at the server.r file, for such a huge application, it's about hundreds, maybe thousands of lines.
And we just chopped it up in different sections and sourced it using a source local command.
And this makes also the code more maintainable.
It also means that if you work as a team, it's much easier to work with one person on a single file.
Because if you work with multiple persons on the same file, you have the risk of conflict.
So it makes things a little bit more difficult.
So that was one of the things that we also did, to split up the code.
And make it easier to maintain the application or to add new features.
One of the things that was very important for us is the tracking of the usage of the applications.
We really wanted to know how are users interacting with our applications.
Of course, you can ask what they're doing.
But it's also nice to have some quantitative data about it.
So we use ShinyLogs as a package.
And I think ShinyLogs is a great package for that.
However, there were some privacy issues with ShinyLogs.
One of the things with ShinyLogs was it was recording the IP number.
And the IP number is an identifiable number which can identify a person.
And according to our privacy statement, we cannot record it.
So what we did is that we wrote some functions.
So now we rewrote some functions of ShinyLogs and then overloaded them in the library.
It was in the assigned namespace.
So we made some little adjustments to this package without actually altering the package.
And what ShinyLogs does is store all the data that has also an SQLite database.
We created even a separate dashboard out of it.
So we could just follow the user interaction.
All right.
These were just some details.
Of course, when you're working with an application, you're always thinking,
what are the next steps that we're going to do?
One of the things I really like to look into is using regression tests.
We are creating a Shiny application.
But testing takes quite a lot of time.
If you can automate this somehow,
it will really contribute to your speed of coding and speed of adding new features.
It's not implemented right now in Cluster Buster,
but we're thinking of it to do it for the next version.
Also, one of the things that we want to look into is the communication
between all these reactive elements in such an application.
We think it can be more efficient, but it's also,
if you're working with it, it always gives me headaches.
So we really have to think about it once.
And also for other applications,
I'm not sure if we're going to apply it to the next version of Cluster Buster,
but at least for other applications we're working with,
we're thinking about using frameworks like Golem or something else
just to make the development cycle a little bit faster.
And we really like to make this open source.
However, it's not on top of our list.
We're very busy.
The COVID numbers are soaring high here.
But we really like to make it open source.
So maybe in the future we put it somewhere so you can have a look at it.
And of course, we're also thinking about Cluster Buster 2.0,
the next version of this application.
So in summary, as a data scientist,
you like to make shiny applications where you have to be aware
that you're not a security oriented programmer.
So make sure that somebody else, in our case,
the IT department is taking care of the security
and that they provide a safe environment,
in this case, a Docker environment,
where you just can put in your application.
So you have to really think about your infrastructure.
And that means go talk to these IT people.
They, especially considering security,
at least at our institute, they know what they're doing.
And also ask yourself, do you need all the data?
If you create an application, do you need to connect
that application to all the corporate data you have?
Or can you just extract only the data you need for this application?
It means that in the case of a data breach,
not everything is lost, but just one piece of,
just a few data points.
And the second thing is that if you make a selection,
your application will be quite fast.
Also, of course, modules make you happy.
So please do use modules, split your code.
It's very important to know your user.
Sjoerd talked quite a lot about this.
And what I really like is that you have to work as a team.
As you start with such an application,
you put some people together, go sit with each other,
and just talk, how are we going to do this?
And how do we like to work together?
And how do we, well, make this work?
Just a little reflection on how you interact with each other.
It can be very important.
And it can be very fruitful to get the energy going in a team.
And that's all for today.
Thank you so much, Sjoerd.
That's an amazing presentation.
It's awesome to see both sides of this, too.
And again, we're all clapping, although you can't hear us.
You can see in the chat.
There are a lot of great questions over on Slido.
So I'll start asking a few of them here from Slido,
especially the anonymous ones.
But we'd love to have people jumping in
and asking questions, too.
So feel free to raise your hand on Zoom, too.
Well, one of the most upvoted anonymous questions right now is,
as Cluster Buster began to be used by more people,
did you face any performance issues?
And how did you adjust your app to deal with more concurrent users?
Really good question.
It's something that we thought about when we first started.
But the reality is that we create an application for professional use.
So it's not the case that we have hundreds or thousands of users
at the same time.
Sometimes it's 10 users at the same time, for example.
And this is not a problem for us
because our impact does not fully rely on the amount of users
that we have.
Sometimes it's more impactful to have one doctor look at it
than other doctors look at it.
So for us, the numbers don't really say that much.
But because this was a tool made for professional use,
the number of users was continuously low.
So we never actually faced any problems in performance.
And also because we are running this on the OpenShift Kubernetes platform,
well, it will probably just scale up
if we run into any performance issues.
This is a more relevant question for following applications
that we are planning to make public for public use
instead of for professional use.
I see another question that says,
thanks for the great presentation.
How did you gain the support of the IT team?
Because for some, there may be a little bit of hesitation
regarding Shiny.
Yeah.
Well, maybe.
I didn't.
Well, I did notice some pushback, obviously.
Someone even literally said to me,
this is never going to work.
As long as you just stay positive
and patient at some points,
I think it will all work out.
So also what really helped was when we showed the prototype
or when we showed the application itself,
this really helped.
So when we talked to people and I showed the application,
they all of a sudden understood what we were talking about.
And this, I believe, was very helpful.
Yeah.
That's very important to have a very open-minded talk
with these IT people.
Just tell them that you want to put something
like the cluster bus that you want to put on the internet
and just try to think and work together
how we can do this in a secure way.
And at least our IT departments,
suddenly what you would say is,
they understand what you want
and they are thinking with you.
Don't try to make them think against you,
but try to find a common solution
which actually works and it's possible.
Also, maybe the crisis helped out a little bit.
So in this case, it was, let's get it done.
That was also the mindset.
So at some points we had to just push through
and say, well, we need to do this.
And I guess that's different in normal situations.
But apart from that, I think a good honest talk,
as Joep said, and showing what your ideas are really helps.
Definitely.
Thank you both.
Yves, I see you asked a question in Slido
and I'd love to pull in some people
if you want to ask anything live.
I fixed the ability to unmute yourself
if you want to jump in.
And the question is,
can you say anything about the updating
the frequency of the data,
the update frequency of the data
in SQLite in production?
Yeah.
They send the data to us once a day
and it's usually in the morning
and now the data science team starts in the morning
with all the extraction and stuff like that
and they prepare the data sets that we use
and usually around noon,
we run our scripts to create a database.
So it's created on a daily basis.
So once a day, we create a new database
with the latest numbers from yesterday.
So it's once a day.
But if you want to do it more often,
it's quite easy.
You can run it every hour,
but the new data is only available once a day.
Great.
Thank you.
And I just put in the chat,
feel free to raise your hand
if you want to ask your question live
so you don't have to just keep hearing me repeating them.
But the next one was,
which model was used to define the clusters?
Right.
So from an epidemiological standpoint,
I cannot really answer that question,
but I can answer how the data got constructed.
So every time someone got a positive test result,
he or she was called by one of the employees at the MHSS
and was asked,
with whom have you been in contact?
Where have you been?
Where do you think it's most likely
that you've contracted the virus?
And once three or more people were saying
that they most likely contracted the virus
at a specific place,
we would call that a cluster.
Obviously, if you scale up,
you would call it an outbreak or a super outbreak.
And the MHSS would write down these clusters,
and they would send that to the RIVM.
So that's the starting point
for us to use for our visualizations.
This was a separate data file that they sent us.
Thank you.
Thank you for an awesome presentation.
Can I ask you if you consider not using a database?
We have considered this.
At first,
different ways to go.
We were not really sure
what would be the best way to go.
So we started out with the database
and eventually stuck with it.
But this is one of those things
that from time to time you need to reevaluate.
Like, is this the right way for Cluster Buster 2.0?
Is this what you would do?
I'm not totally convinced that we would.
But yeah, there is something to say
for using databases
and something to say for using pins
and just our objects.
You have something to add to that, Job?
Yeah, well, the great thing is that, of course,
in the database,
there are multiple tables you want to use.
And it's very easy to make relations
between these tables.
Therefore, you use a database.
Also, if you put this information
in our object or in our environment,
it's...
For me, it's more difficult to work with.
A database is such an easy object.
And it's a single file.
And you can work with it in IR.
But you can also open it
in an SQLite browser
just to inspect your data.
Or you can use it in...
Also, you can use it
in multiple applications.
It's much easier to have
multiple file connectors
to the database.
So for me,
I think I prefer a database
over some file-based object.
So maybe it's a matter of taste.
Yeah.
One of the ways you could look at this
is also from the performance perspective.
So right now, we are iterating over our database
to give back the data
from a specific region.
This is not a very fast operation.
So if you use...
I forgot the name of the package.
But we do monitor
the performance of the application.
And if we would notice
that it would take a lot of time
to produce the visualizations,
then I would definitely consider
backing off of a database.
So there are a multitude
of considerations you need to make.
So for now, it's fine.
Maybe because of our small user group
or the amount of data that we have.
But this is certainly a question
that's on our mind.
Thank you.
You have your hand raised, too.
Yeah. Hi.
I'm Nimish Sheth.
First of all, thank you
for a fabulous presentation.
I'm,
like a lot of people around the world,
super interested in how,
you know, regardless of where
in the world we are,
we're tracking COVID outbreaks
and responding.
I'm originally from India.
I was super interested
when India had a big surge
April of last year.
And I actually did some
personal
research into the data
just to see if I was
in a position where I had to intervene.
At what point do you do something?
It's easy when something
happens and then you react.
But my question here is,
I
understand that you have a separation
of data processing.
So you had a team that took
source data and
did the transformations
that you then ingested
to work within your application.
So the question is,
what's the communication?
Because
the upfront data engineering is going
to do a certain amount of work,
not guaranteeing
a level of transformation that you
want in your application.
So is that a two step process
or are you giving them requirements?
I guess it's a little bit of both.
So I am part of the team that does
the ETL using R actually.
So I was
pretty up to date with what they
were doing. But eventually we
noticed that there was some distance
between Team Clusterbuster and the
team that's doing the ETL.
So this is where Fleur comes
in. She is the latest
member of our team and she
works for the team that does the
data preparation.
But she's also part of Team
Clusterbuster.
So we noticed that there was some
risk of miscommunication.
And that's where we decided to
narrow the bonds.
So this is a very, very, very
good and important point you
make. And it's something that I
was
very aware of.
And finally, we had to take steps
in order to prevent some
miscommunication from happening.
Yeah.
This is where vertical
integration is such an important
part.
So as long as it's possible
to virtually integrate these
different skills into your team,
it prevents miscommunication.
So this is one of the aspects
where it was very hard to do so.
But we eventually managed to
form some link to prevent
miscommunication.
Thank you.
And Ubudi, I see you also
asked a question.
I'll read it, but jump in if you
have any other context to add.
But it was this is a rapidly
evolving disease.
How often do you collect feedback
from users and update your app?
Right.
So I had the meetings with the
advisory board on a weekly
base basis.
So we spoke to them very
often.
And I work at the at the RIVM.
I'm literally surrounded by
doctors and epidemiologists.
When I'm I'm there.
So I'm always
up to date on the on the latest
of the latest.
So.
How often do you change?
That is a good question because
you do not want to become
neurotic in what you develop.
So this is where your focus on
value is so important.
But we did have to change a
couple of times.
And I I had this idea
that we should sort of move
along with the the epidemic.
So at a certain point,
vaccination was more important.
So we started focusing on that
right now.
We're at the Omicron phase.
This brings in new challenges.
So we have to stay flexible but
not neurotic.
I think that's that's the most
important part.
Like that.
I see there's a bunch
of other anonymous questions,
too.
And one was was your data
loaded into Docker in a form
of some aggregates?
How did you create them?
This one's for you.
What we did is that we
of course, we had these these
already prepared data
sets and we made our own
selections out of these data sets
and put it into the SQLite
database.
It's not aggregated data.
It's it contains individual
data points.
The actual personal information
is removed, but still it's
individual medical data.
So it's still it's still
medical data.
So it still has to comply with
all this privacy regulations.
And then we have this database,
which is a single file.
At our container solution, which
is Red Hat's OpenShift,
it's connected to Kubernetes.
We can add a persistent storage
to a container.
And what we do is that we copy
this database to that persistent
storage of that container.
And when the container starts,
it's actually mounting this
persistent storage
and access the database.
So this is a bit how it works.
And the next question is, which
is the main advantage of keeping
it all in R with Shiny
instead of using Streamlit,
Power BI or Tableau,
for example?
Did you feel you were at any
point sacrificing on simplicity?
Well, no, no.
I understand where this question
is coming from.
Maybe it's easier to build a
dashboard using
Power BI.
This could be the case.
But however, we had the
skills to build an R Shiny
application.
And this is the interesting part.
I started working with R Shiny
with two new members
of that team that does the data
preparation.
These were people that are
skilled in R, but not so much in
R Shiny.
And we managed to build
a new application from scratch
within,
let's say, two months.
So with no experience, we
got to create an application
in R Shiny within two months.
And this was part-time.
This was a couple of hours a
week that we were working on
this.
So it is not as hard as you
might think.
The advantages of
having the same language through
the entire analytics pipeline
vastly outweigh the
complexity of creating an R Shiny
application.
It does take some
getting used to the idea of
modularization.
And obviously, there are a
couple of questions that you
really need to wrap your mind
around.
But once you get there, it's
very doable, especially if you
have R skills and you work in
tidyverse.
As I said, the
advantages vastly outweigh the
disadvantages here.
Thank you.
And left-turners, I see you
asked a question on
slide 02.
So if you want to jump in,
please feel free to do so.
But the question was, did you
use any specific method to
increase the performance of your
application?
And did you scope your data or
load it all in the global file?
Yeah.
Considering the performance, of
course, we used
we profiled the application
while it was running.
Yeah.
And just see what
are the
things that just take most of
the time.
And it usually means
the first step where you have to
load the data from the database
into memory so the user can
work with it.
By using a database, it also
means that you can
have most of the data just on
file and you just use a query
using a dbplyr and only
collect the data you want to
use.
And that's actually the
only gets the data from a
specific region.
And that's actually the data
frame you're working with most
of the time in the database.
And so
in short, we have quite a
large database.
And now we have about
tens of thousands of
infections each day.
So it's getting actually
bigger and bigger and bigger.
So you also see applications
get a little bit slower.
But as soon as the data is
loaded, then the
application is as fast as
always.
So that's the
so what we do is that we select
the data from the database.
Only the selected data is
put in some.
I'm not even sure it's in
the global.
I think we use a global
data frame for certain
visualizations.
Some are selected at the level
of a module.
It depends.
So when we
started off, I thought like five
seconds loading time is too much.
It needs to be instant.
I think we passed five seconds
now for some visualizations.
And we probably could do better
with with react
log and profits.
But in all honesty, it's like
sometimes the metaphor is
when are you going to change the
wheels on the bus when you're
going over the highway at 130
miles an hour?
So it's quite difficult to
to optimize at this moment.
But in all honesty, I think
this does deserve a little bit
more attention from from us.
A question that I wanted
to ask earlier, too, is
around the prototype that
you built and the process
that you went through, because I
feel like that was so important
for getting everybody on board.
Was that that was
sure to shiny up say, oh, or
what was the process for doing
that?
Well, I created it just in our
studio
in the month of December.
I did some work on our shiny
before I started working at the
RIVM. So I had a lot of code
already sitting there
ready to be used.
So that was very helpful.
So I think I created this in
I don't know, maybe a week or so.
And then we put it on shiny upside.
I.O.
Just for some.
No, I didn't even put it on shiny
upside. I.O. I just ran it locally
and showed it to people.
I was just sitting in my office
waving at people wanting to
telling them to come in and take
a look at the application.
And afterwards we put it on
shiny upside that I.O.
And we could show it to two more
people.
But, yeah, a bit
of improvisation there.
Cool.
This application, this was a
demo application containing fake
data, of course.
Obviously, yeah.
But I see Dan also asked
a question through Slido that
was how did you make sure regions
and users felt comfortable
using your app so you're not
just fielding questions that are
answered within the app?
Yeah, that's that's a really good
question.
I think
it helps that we are from the
National Institute.
I think that really helps because
we are a trusted institute and the
municipal health services, I
think, have a good relationship
with our organization.
So that's
that helped.
And also giving the presentations
just showing the people that
that we were working very, very
hard in order to to create value
insights for them and not just
assume that they will find the
application.
Go to them, put in effort and
earn the trust.
I think that was that was also
really important.
Yeah.
But it wasn't it was not
necessarily a given that they
trusted our application
at all times.
Yeah.
Thank you.
And a few of the other questions
just going through.
One is how did you make sure
that the data was collected in
the right way?
And the other one is just going
through one
few more technical ones about
Docker.
Let's see.
Why not vote in one of what types
of businesses are hotbeds for
covid clusters?
Has this information informed
policy changes that people
have used it?
That's a good question.
So there's a lot of data
being collected on
the cluster, not all of it.
But all of it is used
in our
how you say this national council,
national advisory board on
covid.
And they definitely use this data
to in
our models.
They use this data to form
policies surrounding the
battling covered of 19.
But this was not so.
So public policymaking
on a national level was not
influenced by the cluster buster,
but on a local level,
it was in a way influenced.
Think, for example, of the allocation
of these mobile vaccination units.
I think I think that's a good example.
So that's one very practical thing
that they use the cluster buster for
to to optimize.
But they were not opening
schools because the cluster buster
said it was safe to do so.
It didn't go like that.
Tom Fowler, I see you just put
a question to the chat.
If you'd like to jump in.
Thanks.
Yes, I got someone.
Yeah.
Great presentation, guys.
Thank you.
That was really interesting.
You mentioned towards the start
that some of the data quality issues
improved over the course of the rollout
engagement with your users.
Great to know a little bit more about
that.
That's obviously good data and helps
create good output and
bad data isn't
No, exactly.
So this was, as I said, like a
side effect, but a very important one
for us. So one of the examples is
that when they were
writing down the clusters, they
sometimes forgot to add the postal
code, which was something that we used
to give a cluster location on a map.
So at one point, one of the images
has contacted me and said, well, we
don't see any visualizations of our
clusters, but they were not giving us
the information to do so.
So then we had a conversation
about what we were missing.
And then they started filling out the
postal code. So they were improving
their data quality and that
helped us to give them back the
insights.
Another example is that they were
using a software program to
do all their registrations.
But at some point they have to
click an option that says send this
to the RIVM and they were not always
doing that. So we actually put up a
notice on the dashboard saying if
you want to have these insights,
make sure that you actually
activate that button.
And a lot of them actually
started doing better in that regard.
Yeah, great. It's that feedback loop
that I think is really important
that always
needs to be called out.
Great. Thanks.
Definitely.
Yeah, definitely.
So obviously
one of the questions that they ask is
why do we need to register
this?
We are already very, very
busy. What's the use of us putting
this specific detail down?
And by providing insights, they
got a part of the answer on that
question. Like this is why you do it.
And oftentimes that would help
them in their motivation, obviously.
Yeah, but I think this is a question
for you.
They said maybe I missed it, but did
you use a CI CD
for the shiny Docker Kubernetes
workflow?
Yeah, so that's what we did.
I think I forgot to mention it, but
as soon as we update
one of the testing accept or
production versions in
our Git environment,
it immediately kicks off
a new rebuild of the
container.
So this is what I call
continuous deployment.
Continuous integration, for example
with integration tests.
I love to do that, but we
haven't done it yet.
Thank you.
Two other questions
that were there on Slido. And again,
if there is a burning question that I missed
from the chat window on Zoom to
jump in.
But it is, did you have any functionality
within your apps to send individual
level data to municipalities?
No.
No, we didn't.
So we
added a download button at
a specific point
in our dashboard.
But we were
very wary of
providing options to download
the data for obvious
reasons. You don't want this data
to just float around.
So we limited the
sharing of personal data. There are
other options in which the MHSs can
get personal,
get more detailed information from
the RFEM, but most of them already have
it. So no, through
the Cluster Buster, we were not really
providing any personal details.
This was also not the point of the Cluster Buster.
So the point of the Cluster Buster
was to
help doctors and epidemiologists
gain an understanding of the COVID-19 situation.
And this is,
the numbers were so great, the individual
level was not important.
I see Fernando just asked
in the chat if you have some resources
on using modules in SHINee.
And that can be a question for
anyone on the call if you have any resources
you want to share in the chat.
I think there are on the
RStudio website
some blog articles that are very good
resources.
That's how I started also.
On YouTube
you find some
R user conference, RStudio
conference presentations
about SHINee
modules.
So there's plenty of
information about it.
And the most important thing is
just try.
SHINee modules,
when you start, it's a bit difficult
to wrap your head around, but as soon
as you get it done, it's getting easier
and easier.
Just try.
And ask around, of course, if you don't
know what to do.
One of the
last questions I saw on Slido was
for huge amounts of data,
have you tested out file types like
RDA or PDF?
Like RDA or Parquet
to store your data set within your containers?
It's
not for Cluster Buster. We have other
applications with huge files
with many data where
it's a concern, but we started with Cluster Buster.
The current way of
using SQLite was fast enough.
Now we're running
into situations where we think
it might be faster.
Getting it faster would be nice.
But for other applications,
we want to look into it.
But it's very
depending on the type of data
and how you use it in your application.
So actually, when you're
starting off,
it's always good to think about it and do
some tests.
It really depends
on what you want to do with your data.
Thank you.
Thank you for answering all these questions
too. I know I'm throwing a lot of questions
at you, and we're getting right until
the end of time here.
So I'd love to just
ask one more question
for people who are on the call who are maybe
in this position of
just starting to
use Shiny or they have this idea
of something that could help the business
or organization. What
is one piece of feedback you
would give them for
just getting started with that first project?
Start small.
Just take something
relatively simple.
Make it
look good.
Once again, I'm sorry to emphasize
this, but it is important. If you want to
convince decision makers,
then definitely do so.
But start out with something
small. And this is one of the reasons why
we are working towards making
something open source, because I think
we can help you guys
get a head start with this.
I really hope we can help
you guys. So more data-driven
healthcare
is always good.
Just start with
something small. Make sure it looks good, it works
good, and use that
to convince your
decision makers.
Awesome. Thank you.
Jan, do you have anything else to add
or a tip you would give people?
No, I think
at least if you work at
a big corporate or institute like
us, go talk
with your IT department.
Just discuss things,
what you want, and try to find
solutions. But
keep an open mind and keep an open talk
with these guys, and
finally you will find something which
works for everybody.
Maybe
one last thing to add, and there is a
great blog on this, on the website
of RStudio, I believe it was,
on why a code-first approach
is a good thing to do.
I think it's really
wise to read through this and understand the
reasoning behind this, because a code-first approach
really does help.
For example,
if you want to open source the way
you work, well, you need code.
Code is reproducible.
For quality
assurance and quality control, code is
a good thing to have. So there are
a couple of
very convincing reasons to work
with a code-first
approach. But go read the blog,
and I think that will give you some background into
our arguments for this as well.
Thank you.
I think I put the right one there.
I know there's a few different ones
on code-first, but I'll try and gather
all the resources that were shared in the chat
too when I share the recording,
and we'll share the slides there too.
I just want to say thank you so much
to both of you for the awesome
presentations and just being so open
with us and sharing all that you learned.
I really appreciate it,
and thank you all for joining too.
It's great to see all the amazing
questions.
Well, thanks for the opportunity.
It was a pleasure.
Thank you very much.
Indeed, my pleasure.
Thank you.